---
layout: post
title: Dick Lit
tags: literature
--- 
My progress on [Books That Literally All White Men Own](http://bit.ly/1IBzaou)

☑ = unowned, read
☒ = owned, read
◻︎ = owned, unread
†  = unowned, unlikely

☑︎	1. Shogun, James Clavell
†	2. Slaughterhouse-Five, Kurt Vonnegut
☑	3. A Confederacy of Dunces, John Kennedy Toole
◻	4. Infinite Jest, David Foster Wallace
†	5. A collection of John Lennon’s drawings.
☑	6. A Farewell to Arms, Ernest Hemingway
☒	7. The first two volumes of A Song of Ice and Fire, George R.R. Martin
†	8. God Is Not Great, Christopher Hitchens
☒	9. Catch-22, Joseph Heller
†	10. I Hope They Serve Beer In Hell, Tucker Max
†	11. Atlas Shrugged, Ayn Rand
†	12. The Man Who Mistook His Wife For A Hat, Oliver Sacks
☑	13. The Catcher in the Rye, J.D. Salinger
†	14. The Godfather, Mario Puzo
†	15. The Great Gatsby, F. Scott Fitzgerald
☑	16. Lolita, Vladimir Nabokov
†	17. Fight Club, Chuck Palahniuk
☒	18. The Master and Margarita, Mikhail Bulgakov
☑	19. The Da Vinci Code, Dan Brown
†	20. The Grapes of Wrath, John Steinbeck
†	21. The Stand, Stephen King
†	22. The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo, Stieg Larsson
†	23. The Naked and the Dead, Norman Mailer
†	24. Tuesdays With Morrie, Mitch Albom
†	25. It’s Not About the Bike, Lance Armstrong (definitely under the bed)
†	26. Who Moved My Cheese?, Spencer Johnson
†	27. Portnoy’s Complaint, Philip Roth
☑	28. Seabiscuit, Laura Hillenbrand
☑	29. John Adams, David McCullough
†	30. Ragtime, E.L. Doctorow
†	31. Lucky Jim, Kingsley Amis
†	32. America: The Book, Jon Stewart
†	33. The World Is Flat, Thomas Friedman
☑	34. The Tipping Point, Malcolm Gladwell
†	35. The Curious Incident of the Dog In the Night-Time, Mark Haddon
☑	36. Exodus, Leon Uris (if Jewish)
†	37. Trinity, Leon Uris (if Irish-American)
†	38. The Road, Cormac McCarthy
†	39. Marley & Me, John Grogan
☑	40. Freakonomics, Steven D. Levitt
†	41. The Rainmaker, John Grisham
☑	42. Patriot Games, Tom Clancy
†	43. Dragon, Clive Cussler
☑	44. Guns, Germs, and Steel, Jared Diamond
†	45. The Agony and the Ecstasy, Irving Stone
†	46. The 9/11 Commission Report
☑	47. The Spy Who Came In From the Cold, John le Carre
†	48. Rising Sun, Michael Crichton
†	49. A Walk in the Woods, Bill Bryson
†	50. Airport, Arthur Hailey
†	51. Rich Dad, Poor Dad, Robert Kiyosaki
†	52. Burr, Gore Vidal
†	53. Angela’s Ashes, Frank McCourt
†	54. The Wheel of Time, Robert Jordan
†	55. Into Thin Air, Jon Krakauer
†	56. Into the Wild, Jon Krakauer
†	57. Cryptonomicon, Neal Stephenson
☑	58. Godel, Escher, Bach, Douglas Hofstadter
†	59. The World According to Garp, John Irving
†	60. A Brief History of Time, Stephen Hawking
†	61. The Tin Drum, Gunter Grass
☒	62. On the Road, Jack Kerouac
☑	63. Lord of the Flies, William Golding
☒	64. The Lord of the Rings, JRR Tolkien
☑	65. The Bonfire of the Vanities, Tom Wolfe
☑	66. Beowulf, the Seamus Heaney translation
☑	67. Rabbit, Run, John Updike
†	68. The Satanic Verses, Salman Rushdie
◻	69. The Complete Sherlock Holmes, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
†	70. The Big Sleep, Raymond Chandler
☑	71. One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, Ken Kesey
†	72. A Clockwork Orange, Anthony Burgess
†	73. House of Leaves, Mark Danielewski
†	74. The Call of the Wild, Jack London
☑	75. Gravity’s Rainbow, Thomas Pynchon
☑	76. I, Claudius, Robert Graves
†	77. The Civil War: A Narrative, Shelby Foote
†	78. American Psycho, Bret Easton Ellis (a glaring omission from the original, pointed out by Naomi Fry)
†	79. Life, Keith Richards