---
layout: post
title: Questions I do/do not answer on Quora
tags: social media
--- 

I get a lot of enjoyment out of answering questions on Quora, but it seems lately I get more than I can manage in a day. It has started to remind me about my years of trying to dig out from under corporate email. A lot of the fun has gone out of it. Here's a guide to how I evaluate the several questions a week that I am going be be answering out of the typical 20/day requested.

* * *

So, what I've done for a start is to **turn off anonymous A2A**. While there are legitimate reasons someone may want advice on personal questions without advertising who they are, that doesn't fit most of what I see. 

I can't provide **legal advice** (the application of legal principles to particular problems), although I will comment on published legal decisions I find interesting.

I try not to *feed the trolls* and don't answer argumentative questions (***isn't it true ... ?***) except in the rare case that I think someone other than the OP with an open mind who is unfamiliar with the issues might benefit from the answer. By now, I think I've probably said everything I have to say on climate denialism and creationism.

For **job advice** in particular fields, if I really had anything useful to offer I wouldn't still be unemployed since 2009, would I?

For **programming related advice**, I encourage anyone with a need for expert level responses to ask on stackoverflow, which has better and quicker answers than you'll find here. Anyone who is an *absolute newbie*, should hold off asking questions on Quora. I tend to answer if I think understanding some of the underlying principles will be helpful.

For **politics**, I was a Democrat from 1968-1975, a Republican from 1976-2008, and a Democrat since then. I'm very concerned that the GOP is in its current state and I hope to live long enough to see the return of constructive conservatism to replace the party of the angry white guys. Nothing more to say on that subject.

For **aging**, it looks like there is a lot of anxiety about this topic among those who haven't experienced it and some unrealistic hope for a "cure." Don't worry, you'll grow out of it.

For people struggling with **depression**, you should know that it's a chronic, degenerative disease of the brain, it can be helped with treatment by a psychiatrist (medical specialist) or psychologist or both. It's nothing you should feel shame about any more than an attack of appendicitis. *Chronic, low-level stress* is a very important cause.

On life before **adulthood**, the human brain doesn't fully function much before 25. This is a feature, not a bug, because it makes the young extremely open to learning. Take advantage of this time and don't be in a hurry to put it behind you. On the other hand, be careful about choices during these years that will be impossible to undo when you have made the transitions you will inevitably make.

On **history**, currently I'm most interested in the *American Revolution.*

In **economics**, currently I'm most interested in how capitalism has failed to provide the blessings it promised and what to do about it.

In **banking and finance**, ask me anything about residential mortgage backed securities (an extinct monster from before 2008).

With over **4,000** answers, I've probably managed to say everything helpful I have to say on life advice, be sure to try using the search facilities or, if you are really bore, scroll through my answers.

Finally, I am **much more** interested in conversations than simply giving an opinion. I am *far* more likely to answer a question with someone I've exchanged comments with.
