---
layout: post
title: The Universal Hammer
tags: policing
--- 

# Fewer questions needed for the same answer

[The Guardian](http://www.theguardian.com/thecounted) is compiling a list of 2015 police involved deaths. Everyone knows of the focus over the past year on the role of racial animus in the many high-profile incidents. But other, less prominent cases summarized by that reporting illustrate other aspects of policing that deserve attention. This is not an *all* lives matter essay and solving the types of problems discussed here will do little to address racial problems in policing. 

# Autumn Steele, 34 year-old white female

On January 6, 2015, a lot was happening in the front yard of 104 North Garfield Avenue in Burlington, Iowa. Snow covered the yard, and most  of the family was outside amidst shouting and pummeling. City Police Officer Jesse Hill was trying to separate the parents, the 4-year old son was crying and young Sammy rushes outside to come to their aid. He jumps on Hill's back, who turns around, draws his weapon, fires at Sammy, falls backwards and fires again. One shot kills Autumn and that shot or the other injures Sammy.


Sammy is a German shepard. He survived his injuries and escaped conviction as a vicious animal.

Officer Hill [was not prosecuted.](http://www.dps.state.ia.us/commis/pib/Releases/2015/DesMoines_County_Attorney_Ruling_OIS_Burlington.pdf)The county attorney concluded that Hill acted reasonably in shooting at Sammy to avoid injury and the facts would not support a charge of involuntary manslaughter or any greater offense.

[The National Animal Care and Control Association Guidelines](http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.nacanet.org/resource/resmgr/Docs/NACA_Guidelines.pdf) recommend that police officers receive training to better respond to canine threats with non-lethal alternatives. According to a [site](http://www.acolodd.com) dedicated to memorializing police and animal control officers killed in the line of duty, animals have been directly reponsible for deaths of *two* officers in last 50 years. One died as a result of injuries sustained in a fall while attempting to control a dog; the other was killed by a loose cow. 

# Balancing, the tough question

Mrs. Steele, the inadvertant victim of Officer Hill's shots is not a sympathetic figure. News accounts and the county attorney's report show that she was the aggressor and had come straight home from a court hearing prohibiting her from returning unsupervised.

That shouldn't matter.

The preschooler could just as easily have been shot. Or the husband. Or a bystander or neighbor.

The application of deadly force against a threat to a police officer is secondarily a decision to expose others to harm equal to or greater than the harm that the officer faces. No one wants to be bitten, especially after asking the owners to control the dog. 

But no one wants to die to prevent a dog bite, either. 

A police officer who is taking a careful shot at an active shooter to prevent her own or another's safety is taking a considered risk. It may turn out well (the would-be school shooter is killed before unleasing fire on students and staff). It may turn out poorly (the bullet ricochets off the shooter's weapon and hits a bystander). Everyone should join the officer in mourning the accident just as they should join in celebrating a successful shot.

A police officer, like one in Hill's situation, who is taking shots while falling is taking an unconsidered risk. *Shoot first, think later* makes it impossible to weigh the risk avoided against the risk created. It is also unlikely that any amount of training is going to be effective to make split-second life-and-death decisions while falling to the ground which minimize the risk of doing more harm than good.

Police doctrine that promotes deadly force to prevent injuries that are not life threatening leads inevitablly to promoting deadly force to pre-empt or deter threats. Bystander casualties become *collateral damage*, at most regrettable but secondary to the requirements of force protection. Its exact analogy is deadly force in the form of high-speed pursuit. If a felon fleeing at 125mph presents a grave danger to public safety, it is hard to see that having him followed by one or more police officers reduces that threat.

The police are not physicians. They do not proceed from the premise of a first duty to *do no harm.* But we should want them to proceed from a duty to *do least harm.*  
