---
layout: post
title: Hard but simple: parsing YAML files in Haskell
tags: Haskell
---

It is a truth universally acknowledged that the best way to learn a language is from the lips of a lover. Mine, alas, has no Haskell, so I have made the choice I usually do. Rather than attempting first to master the rules of syntax and the rationale underlying a new computer language, I launch into trying to solve a *real* problem, by which I mean automating some repetitive task that I would otherwise have to do by hand.

In this case, it was tweaking a LaTeX table. I chose Haskell because I was already using the estimable **pandoc** to convert the rest of my document and it has a facility to pipe its AST (abstract syntax tree) through to a filter for intermediate processing before rendering the final document.

Alas, the functionality I sought was not available without doing some heavy lifting of internals that is beyond my pay grade as a rank Haskell beginner. I did manage to get a version working, but it had two major defects: First, it relied on parsing regular expressions. I imagine a term like *unPythonic* applies to this approach -- *unHaskellian*? Second, it lacked a clean separation between logic and data, meaning it would have to be rewritten for each new table that differed from this first use.

The functionality could also be achieved through **sed and awk* in combination with the other standard tools of **shell programming**. But, as I had come this far with Haskell, I determined to continue.

*What a long, strange trip it's been.*  I learned a lot along the way, but I'm only going to report the results. There are any number of great resources on theory and concepts, but *recipes seem hard to come by.*

To begin a **yaml** file, table.yaml

	stripComments: true
	stripLable: true
	zeroEntry: "."
	justifyLeft: true
	stubHeader: "Cause of Death"
	subHeader: "& (\\%) & (\\%) & (\\%) & (\\%)"
	
In the same directory, mwe.hs

	{-# LANGUAGE OverloadedStrings #-}  -- yaml

	module Mwe where

	import Data.Yaml 
	import Data.Maybe (fromJust)

	data ReadData = ReadData { stripComments     :: Bool
							   , stripLable      :: Bool
							   , zeroEntry       :: Bool
							   , justifyLeft     :: Bool
							   , stubHeader      :: String
							   , subHeader       :: String
							   } deriving (Eq, Ord, Show)

	instance FromJSON ReadData where
		parseJSON (Object v) = ReadData <$>
							   v .: "stripComments" <*>
							   v .: "stripLable"    <*>
							   v .: "zeroEntry"     <*>
							   v .: "justifyLeft"   <*>
							   v .: "stubHeader"    <*>
							   v .: "subHeader" 
		parseJSON _ = error "Can't parse ReadData from YAML/JSON"

Fire up ghci (you wouldn't be reading this if you didn't have it installed, right?). I'm using

	> GHCi, version 7.10.2: http://www.haskell.org/ghc/

	Prelude> :l mwe
	[1 of 1] Compiling Mwe             ( mwe.hs, interpreted )
	Ok, modules loaded: Mwe.
	*Mwe> file <- decodeFile "table.yaml" :: IO (Maybe ReadData)
	*Mwe> let unwrapped = fromJust file
	*Mwe> stripComments unwrapped
	True
	
I won't embarrass myself by revealing how long it took to get this working. I *did* pick up a fairly solid understanding of types, some insight into typeclasses and instances and got on the right track for IO and Maybe, with some notion of what it means to be *pure* in Haskell. What took the longest was how to do anything with a successful read of a **yaml** file other than to print it, which is where the examples I found stopped. I acknowledge my  debt to the many sources I consulted to figure this out.

In the great tradition of *monkey see, monkey do*, steal this snippet. 
