---
layout: post
title: Gerontocracy and its discontents
tags: #politics
--- 

We boomers have devolved from *if it feels good, do it to you're only as old as you feel.* Alas, medical science and society at large come to disagree with us. The debates, faintly ridiculous, about boomers in their 60s being still **middle age**, beggar politeness when extended to the leading edge boomers, now in their early 70s. By any historical standard, we are **old**. Sorry 'bout that.

I recently moved into that category, and a review in the LRB of [The General vs. The President] caught my eye. I learned that at the start of the Korean War General Douglas MacArthur was my age, 70, which, as it happens was President Trump's age at his inaugeration.

Old men are much given to rumination and, since the days of Nestor, fond of recounting the glories of their youth, the vigor of their prime and the sagacity of their old age. There are exceptions, of course. Some old men are caught up in current miseries, personal and real or impersonal and imagined. Other old men, sadly, lack the powers of concentration due to dementia. Only a few of us, however, remain headstrong and impulsive into old age. My father was one.

Douglas MacArthur was another. No one could dispute his bragging rights. First in his class at West Point in 1903, chief engineer of the Pacific Division of the Corps of Engineers in 1905, nominated three times for the medal of honor, winning it once, a brigader general at 38 with a reputation for physical fearlessness and his 7th Silver Star, Superintendant of West Point, the Army's youngest major general at 44, Chief of Staff at 46, Field Marshall of the Army of Philippines, recalled to service as Lieutenant General shortly after Pearl Harbor, Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in the Southwest Pacific Area, Supreme Commander of the Allied Forces in Japan and a 5-star general, author of the post-war Japanese constitution, covert candidate for the 1948 Republican presidential nomination, and Commander-in-Chief of the United Nations Command at the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950. *See* the [Wiki] bio.

It's no wonder that William Manchester chose as the title for his biography of MacArthur [American Caesar]. Like Caesar, MacArthur referred to himself in the third person, was contempuous of lesser mortals (Eisenhower was "the best [clerk] I ever had") and imperiously ambitious.

The old man had some masterstrokes left. After the South Korean positions were overrun to the extent that the Joint Chiefs of Staff were considering throwing in the towel, MacArthur landed behind North Korean lines at Inchon and pushed the North Korean forces, in disarray, back to the Chinese border at the Yalu River.

The General and President Truman (at that time aged 68) jointly decided that the war objective was no longer to restore the *status quo ante* but to reunify the Korean peninsula under an allied government. At this early stage of the Cold War, a defeat anywhere was seen as a defeat everywhere. However, MacArthur badly underestimated the capacity and williness of the Chinese to intervene, which they promptly did, pushing the allies back to the present border. 

At this point, MacArthur cried **havoc, let slip the dogs of war**, urging the use of nuclear weapons. Truman said no. MacArthur said yes. Truman said "you're fired."

*The lesson of this story, the moral of this song* is that old men long accustomed to power and deference may still have tricks up their sleeves, but the biggest trick is the power of self-deception.

President Trump's resume as a colossus bestriding history before a downfall is, of course, too trivial for notice. Within his sphere, however, as the head of an organized family empire, he enjoyed the unquestioned dominion over his minions. That sphere is proving a minor asteroid compared to MacArthur's planetary status, but the Lord Acton dangers are even more acute. Trump has grasped the levers of supreme power that eluded MacArthur, with all of MacArthur's flaws and none of his talents.

Karma is a bitch, my fellow Americans.

[The General vs. The President]: https://www.amazon.com/General-vs-President-MacArthur-Nuclear-ebook/dp/B01AQNZQAE/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1501378136&sr=1-1&keywords=generals++presidents+korean+war+anchor+books
[Wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Douglas_MacArthur
[clerk]: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/06/15/AR2007061501131.html
[American Caesar]: https://www.amazon.com/American-Caesar-Douglas-MacArthur-1880-ebook/dp/B000SEP9OK/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1501381407&sr=8-1&keywords=american+caesar
